Add remaining text to BANKSY notebook (#1010)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: spatial/02-spatial_clustering.Rmd

This serves as a useful baseline for comparison when we later apply the spatially-aware `BANKSY` approach.

Again, remember that we are working at the spot level.

> This means clusters will represent groups similar of cells, rather than individual similar cells.

Reviewer: Honestly, I'm not sure that we need this, but as long as we are editing it... 
```suggestion
This means clusters will represent groups of similar spots, each of which may include multiple nearby cells.
```

What patterns do you see, for example between tumor and parenchymal regions?

### Spatially-aware clustering with Banksy

[`Banksy`](https://prabhakarlab.github.io/Banksy/) ([Singhal et al. 2024](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-024-01664-3)) is a package for spatially-aware dimensionality reduction and clustering.
These spatially-aware clusters can also serve as a first step towards tissue domain identification.

This method rests on the assumption that spots in the same tissue domain tend not only to share similar expression profiles, but tend also to be surrounded by spots with similar expression.
In other words, nearby spots are likely to be transcriptionally similar. 
`Banksy` leverages this insight by incorporating neighborhood information into the PCA itself.
Performing clustering on this spatially-aware PCA allows `Banksy` to identify clusters with both distinct expression and tissue domain structure.

The `Banksy` algorithm works in three steps:

1. **Compute the `Banksy` matrix** with `Banksy::computeBanksy()`.

For each spot, `Banksy` averages expression across its `k_geom` nearest spatial neighbors to create a neighborhood expression profile, stored as the `H0` assay. 

> Optionally, `Banksy` can also compute an Azimuthal Gabor Filter (AGF), which captures directional expression gradients that can help resolve finer structure at domain boundaries. 

Reviewer: I think we want to refer to the specific functions that do the calculation? (I'm not sure we need the prefix on every mention, but it seems to be what you are doing elsewhere)
```suggestion
For each spot, `Banksy::computeBanksy()` averages expression across its `k_geom` nearest spatial neighbors to create a neighborhood expression profile, stored as the `H0` assay. 
Optionally, `Banksy::computeBanksy()` can also compute an Azimuthal Gabor Filter (AGF), which captures directional expression gradients that can help resolve finer structure at domain boundaries. 
```

When AGF is turned on, a second `Banksy` matrix is stored as the `H1` assay (the `0` and `1` in these assay names indicate if AGF is off or on, respectively). 

2. **Run `Banksy` PCA** with `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()`.

> `Banksy` first creates single matrix that is a weighted combination of the normalized expression in `logcounts` and the `Banksy` neighborhood matrix (`H0` or `H0` and `H1` if AGF is on). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Banksy::runBanksyPCA()` first creates single matrix that is a weighted combination of the normalized expression in `logcounts` and the `Banksy` neighborhood matrix (`H0` or `H0` and `H1` if AGF is on). 
```

> (Note that `Banksy` will consider all genes present in the SPE when calculating the PCA; it does not subset to only the most variable genes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Note that `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()` will use all genes present in the SPE when calculating the PCA; it does not subset to only the most variable genes.
```

> We could perform this ourselves by subsetting the SPE before running `Banksy`, but for this notebook we will proceed with the full object.)

Reviewer: Wait, I thought we were filtering?

Author: fixed!!

#### Running Banksy without AGF

> We'll start by computing the `Banksy` matrix without AGF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll start by computing the `Banksy` matrix without AGF.
```

#### Running BANKSY with AGF

Now we'll re-run `BANKSY` with AGF enabled.
As introduced above, AGF captures directional expression gradients and can help `BANKSY` detect finer spatial structure at the boundaries between tissue domains.

When AGF is enabled, `k_geom` takes a vector of two values rather than a single one.
The first value is used for the neighborhood averaging step, as before.

> The second, usually larger value provides the broader spatial context needed for the AGF gradient calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second value, which is usually larger, provides the broader spatial context needed for the AGF gradient calculation.
```

> As suggested in the `BANKSY` documentation, we'll use `k_geom = c(18, 30)` for Visium spot data: 18 spots will be used for the neighborhood averaging, and 30 spots will be used for the AGF calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As suggested in the `BANKSY` documentation, we'll use `k_geom = c(18, 30)` for Visium spot data: 18 spots will be used for the neighborhood averaging and 30 spots will be used for the AGF calculation.
```

#### Running Banksy with AGF

> Now we'll re-run `Banksy` with AGF enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we'll re-run `Banksy::computeBanksy()` with AGF enabled.
```

hvg_spe
```

> The SPE now contains an additional assay `H1`, which stores the AGF-based neighborhood expression profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SPE now contains an additional assay, `H1`, which stores the AGF-based neighborhood expression profile.
```

> Note that `BANKSY` will overwrite `H0` and `H1` in place if you re-run `Banksy::computeBanksy()` with different parameters, so keep this in mind if you want to preserve results from multiple runs.

Reviewer: I think we want to consolidate the warnings about overwriting, and I also want to note that blaming banksy doesn't quite feel right. Banksy is returning a new SPE object; it is us that is choosing to store it back in the same variable.

```suggestion
Note that if you re-run `Banksy::computeBanksy()` with different parameters, the new object will only include the new `H0` and `H1`, as well the`BANKSY_params` entry from that run.
We are saving back to the existing variable, so we are losing our previous results.

If you want to preserve results from multiple runs, you will need to keep this in mind and store each set of results separately.
```

```{r}
assay(hvg_spe, "H1")[1:5, 1:5]
```

As with the non-AGF run, `Banksy::computeBanksy()` updated the `BANKSY_params` entry in the SPE's `metadata` slot to reflect the new settings:

```{r banksy agf metadata}
metadata(hvg_spe)$BANKSY_params
```

> Now we can run `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()` with `use_agf = TRUE`, which tells `BANKSY` to incorporate both (specifically, by concatenating them) `H0` and `H1` when constructing the combined expression-plus-neighborhood matrix that will be input to PCA.

Reviewer: I was going to comment specifically about whether `BANKSY` should be styled as code (which I do want to standardize, and probably not as code), but I realized I am also reacting the personification of BANKSY as an entity that we are telling to do things. This may be a thing we need to deal with throughout, but I only just started to notice it. 
```suggestion
Now we can run `Banksy::runBanksyPCA()` with `use_agf = TRUE`.
With this argument, the function concatenates `H0` and `H1` when constructing the combined expression-plus-neighborhood matrix that will be input to PCA.
```

```{r agf pca, live = TRUE}
# use_agf tells BANKSY to incorporate both the H0 and H1 assays, as well as logcounts expression
hvg_spe <- Banksy::runBanksyPCA(hvg_spe, lambda = lambda, use_agf = TRUE)

# show the SPE
hvg_spe
```

The new PCA is named `PCA_M1_lam0.2`, where `M1` indicates that AGF was used (compared to `M0` from the without-AGF run), and `lam0.2` records the `lambda` value.

> We'll now proceed to calculate the UMAP embeddings and clusters using the same `cluster_params` as we have been using.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'll now proceed to calculate the UMAP embeddings and clusters using the same `cluster_params` that we have been using previously.
```

wrap_plots(plot_list, nrow = 2)
```

> First, what differences do you see between `BANKSY` clusters with and without AGF?

Reviewer: I don't think these need to be ordered? Maybe bullets though (and removing code styling)
```suggestion
What differences do you see between BANKSY clusters with and without AGF?
```

Do you think AGF captured boundaries more cleanly as advertised?
Next, how do the spatially-informed clusters overall compare to non-spatial clusters?

We can get a more quantitative view of how the clustering approaches relate to one another with a heatmap comparing `BANKSY` clusters (rows) to non-spatial clusters (columns).
For this heatmap, we'll specifically use the `BANKSY` AGF clusters.

> We'll also normalize each column by the total number of spots in the given non-spatial cluster; each cell will be colored by the proportion of spots in the non-spatial cluster that are also in the `BANKSY` AGF cluster.

Reviewer: Removing code styling from "BANKSY". I'm going to stop doing this as suggestions, as we just need it to be consistent, and I am not looking at the whole thing.
```suggestion
We can get a more quantitative view of how the clustering approaches relate to one another with a heatmap comparing BANKSY clusters (rows) to non-spatial clusters (columns).
For this heatmap, we'll specifically use the BANKSY AGF clusters.
We'll also normalize each column by the total number of spots in the given non-spatial cluster; each cell will be colored by the proportion of spots in the non-spatial cluster that are also in the BANKSY AGF cluster.
```

```{r cluster banksy heatmap}
clusters_tab <- table(
  colData(hvg_spe)$cluster_banksy_agf,
  colData(hvg_spe)$cluster_nonspatial
)

# normalize by the number of cells in each non-spatial cluster
clusters_tab <- apply(
  clusters_tab,
  2, # apply function to columns
  \(x) x/sum(x)
)

# plot heatmap:

> # non-spatial clusters are columns, and BANKSY with AGF clusters are rows

Reviewer: It would be very helpful to add axis labels with this information. Unfortunately, this is hard with pheatmap. As a workaround, you might add to the cluster labels so they are not just integers... e.g.. AGF1 AGF2, etc.

)
```

The heatmap helps us see how non-spatial clusters map onto the finer AGF cluster structure.
For example, we can see from the coordinate plots that non-spatial clusters 3 and 5 contain spots that are likely dominated by tumor cells.

> These clusters have been split into several `BANKSY` AGF clusters, suggesting that AGF is resolving finer spatial structure within regions that expression-only clustering treated as a single domain.

Reviewer: How do you know this is spatial structure and not over-clustering? I would be cautious with the claims here. As before, I would lean toward questions rather than statements. I would include in those statements something about the AGF1 cluster, which doesn't really seem to me to be anything except "top right".

ensembl_id
```

Now we'll use `scater::plotExpression()` to plot `Col1a1` expression across non-spatial clusters and `BANKSY` AGF clusters.
We'll also include the coordinate plots again, to assist with interpretation.

```{r plot col1a1 expression}
#| message: false
#| fig.width: 9
#| fig.height: 5.5

# expression across non-spatial clusters
nonspatial_expr_plot <- scater::plotExpression(
  hvg_spe,
  features = ensembl_id,
  x = "cluster_nonspatial",
  color_by = "cluster_nonspatial", 
  point_size = 0.5
  
) + 

>   scale_color_brewer(name = "non-spatial cluster", palette = "Dark2")

Reviewer: matching capitalization
```suggestion
  scale_color_brewer(name = "Non-spatial cluster", palette = "Dark2")
```

  
# expression across AGF clusters
agf_expr_plot <- scater::plotExpression(
  hvg_spe,
  features = ensembl_id,
  x = "cluster_banksy_agf",
  color_by = "cluster_banksy_agf", 
  point_size = 0.5
) + 
  scale_color_brewer(name = "BANKSY AGF cluster", palette = "Paired")

# Compile for plotting with patchwork
plot_list <- list(
  nonspatial_expr_plot, 
  agf_expr_plot, 
  coords_nonspatial,
  coords_banksky_agf
)
patchwork::wrap_plots(plot_list, nrow = 2)
```

> Do these patterns match your expectations from the coordinate plots showing clusters on the H&E?

Reviewer: I feel like we could use a bit more here? Personally, I'm not sure I have any expectations about a single gene in the context of clusters, and both seem to have gradients of expression...
